---
title: "The state of Vidify in 2021"
description: "The problems Vidify is facing and how I plan to work on it"
author: "Mario Ortiz Manero"
date: 2021-05-15
---

I wanted to give some closure regarding Vidify to its followers, I'm very
grateful for the support I've received. I haven't been working on this lately;
I've been with other projects and more stuff outside of programming so I had put
Vidify aside for some time. I wanted to explain *why* in this article.

## The Issues

I have some very big issues that I have to deal with before continuing, which
have prevented me from working on Vidify further until now:

### Copyright

I'm not sure how to handle legal issues regarding video playback from YouTube.
This is very complicated to me because I don't know anything about the topic and
I would have to hire a consultant -- for which I don't really have the money
right now.

As far as I know the possible copyright infringement issues aren't a deal
breaker for Vidify. This is how I currently think it'll go (before consulting
anyone):

Vidify has to own the videos it displays, and it needs to save them outside of
YouTube. This is what makes the most sense to me, since we're not only using
copyrighted material, but also infringing YouTube's Terms of Service when we
download their videos, meaning that they could block us in any moment.

There's a catch, though! There doesn't seem to be a problem with playing YouTube
videos if we use their [official player
API](https://developers.google.com/youtube/iframe_api_reference). This is
currently what Vidify uses for the mobile app and what was being worked on by
@pawKer at [#118](https://github.com/vidify/vidify/pull/118).

The problem would be simplified if we limited Vidify to the official YouTube API
then, as we wouldn't be infringing their ToS. But someone would still have to
pay to the owners of the videos we display. For this, what I'm not sure about is
if it's *Vidify* the one that would have to pay for all of their users, or if
the payment would have to come from *each individual user* on their own. There
are platforms like [JunkinMedia](https://www.jukinmedia.com/) that help with
this, which could establish a monthly/yearly fee only for access to the
copyrighted content.

My current plan is to continue developing Vidify until it's more popular, at
which point there'll be a bigger risk of getting a complaint, but I'll probably
have more resources to handle this issue.

### Audio Synchronization

I personally don't think Vidify will be a good enough program until a decent
audio synchronization system is implemented. By good enough I mean that someone
would pay for it; as I've commented earlier it's very likely I'll have to
implement a subscription model for Vidify due to copyright issues. And my [first
attempt](https://github.com/vidify/old-audiosync) was fun, but not really
viable.

This is also extremely complicated to me because I'm still a student and I
haven't been taught much about the topic yet. I have to dedicate a lot of time
to investigate about how this could possibly be done, and even more implementing
it. Fortunately, I will be taking Audio Engineering courses during my next
semester, which should help me get a better understanding about it.

### Rust Integration

After thinking it through I don't think [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/)
integration in [#108](https://github.com/vidify/vidify/pull/108) is worth it
either. If anything I'll just make some Python bindings for the audiosync
feature, but including Rust in the core of Vidify just a maintenance burden that
isn't really that much of an improvement. It did help me sharpen my Rust skills,
but it wasn't helping the Vidify project altogether, and I've learned the
lesson.

Said PR still has a lot of interesting things I want to keep, though:

* An improved CI
* An improved build system, including WIP Windows Store support
* Removing VLC support
* Removing the QtWebEngine in place for a web server

I'll be moving [structconf](https://github.com/vidify/structconf) to my own
profile, as it won't be used by Vidify anymore.

### Youtube-dl Breakage

Vidify needs to update automatically in order to avoid issues with `youtube-dl`.
It gets outdated very quickly, which means the videos stop working if you don't
update `youtube-dl`. This is a big problem when Vidify is built statically
because updating it isn't easy.

The best solution to this in my opinion is to upload Vidify to the main
repositories in all Operating Systems, so that this is handled by them. I don't
really want to add an auto-updater feature to Vidify; I dislike it when that
happens with Steam/Discord/etc instead of via the official repositories, and I
consider it unnecessary when I can use:

* **Windows**: the Windows Store, building statically.
* **Linux**: [Snap](https://snapcraft.io/)/[Flatpak](https://flatpak.org/) for
  distros with slow updates (Ubuntu/Debian), and the official repos for the rest
  of them (Arch, Gentoo, ...). The builds can be dynamic in this case.
* **MacOS**: the App Store can be used for that, building statically. Although
  developing stuff for Apple sucks if you don't want to buy one of their
  products for the low cost of $1K.

Then, I could just have a Continuous Deployment flow that uploads an update each
week for the statically built packages (Windows and MacOS). Vidify could try to
"ping" `youtube-dl` when launched, and if that fails, it can just ask the user
to update it. This shouldn't really be a problem because the repositories I
mentioned earlier update automatically.

## The Plan

Since the audio synchronization feature is a blocker until I can fully release
Vidify and it's not coming soon, I will be working on its core in the meanwhile:

* Clean up the Rust Integration PR
* Polish the Web Server Player PR and merge it
* Work on the new deployment method

After that's done I'll probably have a better grasp at audio engineering, and
will be able to work on the audiosync feature I have always wanted.

---

What do you think? Any thoughts/opinions? You can discuss with us at the [Vidify
Discord](https://discord.gg/dpfF6ev7Hu).
