content/en/blog/rust-parameters.md, before:

---
title: "Optional parameters in Rust"
description: "Analyzing different approaches for optional parameters in Rust"
author: "Mario Ortiz Manero"
developer: true
date: 2020-10-10
---

*Disclaimer: although this post is not directly related to Vidify, I decided to
post it here, since this problem arose in the process of [integrating Rust
](https://github.com/vidify/vidify/issues/107), while improving [Rspotify
](https://github.com/ramsayleung/rspotify/pull/120#issuecomment-683349883).*

Optional or default parameters are a very interesting feature of some languages
that Rust specifically doesn't cover (and looks like it won't [anytime soon
](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2964)). Say your library has lots of
endpoints like so:

```rust
fn endpoint<T1, T2, T3, ...>(mandatory: T1, opt1: Option<T2>, opt2: Option<T3>, ...);
```

In this case, when you call `endpoint`, you have to use `endpoint(mandatory,
None, None, ...)`, or `endpoint(mandatory, Some(val1), Some(val2), ...)`,
instead of the more intuitive `endpoint(mandatory)` or `endpoint(mandatory,
val1, val2)`. Other languages like Python have named arguments, which make
optional parameters natural and easier to read: `endpoint(mandatory, opt1=val1,
opt2=val2)`, while also allowing them to be written in any order.

Even without official support, there are are lots of different ways to approach
them in Rust, which is what this blog post tries to analyze. My goal is not to
show which one is the "best" option, but to exhaustively showcase the different
ways they can be approached, and the ups and downs of each of them.

## Introducing an example
Let's start with a typical web API wrapper library. These often require a client
struct to hold authentication fields and such:

```rust
#[derive(Default, Debug, Clone)]
struct APIClient;
```

This client will have various endpoints which can be used to send requests to
the server. We will use a function with the actual implementation and some type
aliases so that the following snippets are easier to read:

```rust
use std::error::Error;

/// Some value that the endpoint will return
#[derive(Debug, Default)]
struct Value;
type ReturnedValue = Result<Value, Box<dyn Error>>;

/// The actual code for the endpoint inside the client
impl APIClient {
    fn actual_endpoint(name: &str, opt1: Option<u32>, opt2: Option<i32>) -> ReturnedValue {
        println!("params: {} {:?} {:?}", name, opt1, opt2);

        Ok(Default::default())
    }
}
```

## A) Using `Option<T>`
The simplest way to do this would be to just use the `actual_endpoint` function
signature. Sometimes the best solution is the simplest, and your project just
might not need more complex approaches. Do consider if anything more elaborate
is actually necessary.

For the sake of this example, it would look like this:

```rust
impl APIClient {
    pub fn approach_a(&self, name: &str, opt1: Option<u32>, opt2: Option<i32>) -> ReturnedValue {
        self.actual_endpoint(name, opt1, opt2)
    }
}
```

```rust
let api = APIClient {};
let param2: u32 = 324;

api.approach_a("option", Some(param2), Some(1234))?;
api.approach_a("option", None, None)?;
```

### Upsides
* Simplest to understand and implement.

### Downsides
* Multiple optional parameters require lots of `None` and `Some`.
* Parameter names unknown when reading the code, which is specially annoying
with `None` values, since these don't have context to know what they are for.

## B) With `Into<Option<T>>`
A variation of the previous approach consists on using `Into<Option<T>>` as the
generic value for the optional parameters (`impl Into<Option<T>>` can be used as
well). This way, `Some` isn't needed when the optional parameters are specified:

```rust
impl APIClient {
    pub fn approach_b<T1, T2>(&self, name: &str, opt1: T1, opt2: T2) -> ReturnedValue
    where
        T1: Into<Option<u32>>,
        T2: Into<Option<i32>>,
    {
        self.actual_endpoint(name, opt1.into(), opt2.into())
    }
}
```

```rust
api.approach_b("into_option", param2, 1234)?;
// This still works
api.approach_b("into_option", Some(param2), Some(123))?;
api.approach_b("into_option", None, None)?;
```

### Upsides
* `Some` isn't required, which makes it slightly easier to read.

### Downsides
* Multiple optional parameters still require lots of `None`s.
* No parameter names either.
* More complex function signatures, and might not be too "idiomatic".
* Requires generics, 2^N copies of this function may be generated, where N is
the number of optional parameters.

## C) With a custom struct
Another option is to create a struct that holds the parameters and use that
instead. The complexity is still relatively simple, and it can work out well
if the API has functions with repetitive function signatures. This will serve
as a base for the following approaches as well:

```rust
let call1 = params::ApproachC {
    name: "builder".to_string(),
    opt1: Some(param2),
    opt2: Some(123),
};
api.approach_c(&call1)?;
```

We can even use `..Default::default()` to initialize the rest of the parameters
with their default values:

```
let call2 = params::ApproachC {
    name: "builder".to_string(),
    ..Default::default()
};
api.approach_c(&call2)?;
```

The implementation looks like this:

```rust
mod params {
    /// We derive `Default` to be able to initialize with
    /// `..Default::default()`.
    #[derive(Default)]
    pub struct ApproachC {
        pub name: String,
        pub opt1: Option<u32>,
        pub opt2: Option<i32>,
    }
}

impl APIClient {
    pub fn approach_c(&self, data: &params::ApproachC) -> ReturnedValue {
        self.actual_endpoint(&data.name, data.opt1, data.opt2)
    }
}
```

### Upsides
* Some APIs might feel more natural this way, if the combination of these
parameters as a group makes sense.
* The struct can be reused in different calls.

### Downsides
* Multiple optional parameters require lots of `None` and `Some`.
* Way more verbose.
* Can be difficult to scale, since it needs a struct and a function per
endpoint.

## D) With the builder pattern
The previous approach can be improved by using the [builder pattern
](https://doc.rust-lang.org/1.0.0/style/ownership/builders.html) for the
parameters, so that building the parameters is simpler and more pretty to look
at:

```rust
let call1 = params::ApproachDBuilder::default()
    .name("builder")
    .opt1(param2)
    .opt2(2134)
    .build()?;
api.approach_d(&call1)?;

let call2 = params::ApproachDBuilder::default()
    .name("builder")
    .build()?;
api.approach_d(&call2)?;
```

In this case, we use the [`derive_builder`
](https://crates.io/crates/derive_builder) crate to make the implementation less
repetitive:

```rust
mod params {
    #[derive(Default, Builder)]
    pub struct ApproachD {
        #[builder(setter(into))]
        pub name: String,
        #[builder(setter(strip_option), default)]
        pub opt1: Option<u32>,
        #[builder(setter(strip_option), default)]
        pub opt2: Option<i32>,
    }
}

impl APIClient {
    pub fn approach_d(&self, data: &params::ApproachD) -> ReturnedValue {
        self.actual_endpoint(&data.name, data.opt1, data.opt2)
    }
}
```

### Upsides
* It's the most popular pattern in Rust for optional parameters.
* The struct can still be reused in different calls.
* No `None` or `Some` at sight.
* Optional parameters are now associated to their name, which makes it easier
to read.

### Downsides
* Somewhat verbose.
* In our example it can be difficult to scale, since it needs a struct and a
function per endpoint.
* More overhead, both at runtime and compile-time (specially if macros are
used).
* Constructing the values may fail. Thus, the documentation has to specify very
clearly which parameters are mandatory and which aren't.

## E) Endpoint-oriented interface
Here's a different take: what if the API was endpoint-oriented instead of
client-oriented? Starting from the previous approach, we could make the call
*inside the endpoint struct itself* instead of in the API client by overriding
the `build` method from `derive_builder`:

```rust
ApproachEBuilder::default()
    .name("endpoint-oriented")
    .opt1(param2)
    .opt2(1111)
    .call(&api)?;
ApproachEBuilder::default()
    .name("endpoint-oriented")
    .call(&api)?;
```

And its implementation:

```rust
#[derive(Default, Builder)]
#[builder(build_fn(private))]
struct ApproachE {
    #[builder(setter(into))]
    pub name: String,
    #[builder(setter(strip_option), default)]
    pub opt1: Option<u32>,
    #[builder(setter(strip_option), default)]
    pub opt2: Option<i32>,
}

impl ApproachEBuilder {
    pub fn call(&self, client: &APIClient) -> ReturnedValue {
        let data = self.build()?; // This might fail!
        // `actual_endpoint` would have to be at least pub(in crate) in this
        // case.
        client.actual_endpoint(&data.name, data.opt1, data.opt2)
    }
}
```

Note: this is assuming the client contains necessary information to make the
requests, like a [`reqwest::Client`
](https://docs.rs/reqwest/latest/reqwest/struct.Client.html) or authentication
details. But for example, `ureq` can perform calls without a client instance,
just by calling [`ureq::get` and similars
](https://docs.rs/ureq/latest/ureq/fn.get.html). In that case, the API could
just not have a client at all, and the `call` method wouldn't require a
reference to the client.

### Upsides
* Fits perfectly for some specific APIs.
* No `None` or `Some` needed.
* Just as readable as the previous case.
* The struct may be reused.
* Simple to use and implement, since it doesn't need declaring both a function
in the client and a parameters struct, only the latter.

### Downsides
* Still relatively verbose, might not be compatible with some APIs.
* Slight builder pattern overhead, and can also fail to construct the value.

## F) Hybrid derive pattern
Back to the client-oriented API. We can remove some of the disadvantages of the
builder pattern by using a different approach and possibly a custom
implementation instead of just using `derive_builder`.

The client will now have a method that calls `ApproachBuilder::default()` and
whatever is necessary to start building the endpoint. Mandatory parameters are
added to that function's signature, so that the build can never fail. This also
avoids passing the client in `call(&api)`, since we can do that inside the
method. This is how it would look like:

```rust
api.approach_f("hybrid-derive-pattern")
    .opt1(param2)
    .opt2(2222)
    .call()?;
```

And an implementation by wrapping `derive_builder`:

```rust
impl APIClient {
    pub fn approach_f(&self, name: &str) -> ApproachFBuilder {
        ApproachFBuilder::default().client(self).name(name)
    }
}

/// Not meant to be used directly, only within `APIClient`.
#[derive(Default, Builder)]
#[builder(build_fn(private), pattern = "owned")]
pub struct ApproachF<'a> {
    #[builder(setter(strip_option), default)]
    client: Option<&'a APIClient>,
    #[builder(setter(into))]
    pub name: String,
    #[builder(setter(strip_option), default)]
    pub opt1: Option<u32>,
    #[builder(setter(strip_option), default)]
    pub opt2: Option<i32>,
}

impl ApproachFBuilder<'_> {
    pub fn call(self) -> ReturnedValue {
        let data = self.build().unwrap(); // This should never fail
        data.client
            .unwrap()
            .actual_endpoint(&data.name, data.opt1, data.opt2)
    }
}
```

`derive_builder` doesn't know that `build()` can never technically fail
because the mandatory parameters are provided inside the wrapper, so it's kind
of a waste to use this macro. It also forces us to create the wrapper because
the builder always has to be initialized with `Builder::default()`. With a
custom implementation, we could have this new method integrated in the builder
itself instead, like `Builder::new(A, B, C)`.

Thus, it might be better to use other crates like [`safe-builder`
](https://github.com/raiden-rs/safe-builder) (WIP and basically abandoned), or
just a custom implementation.

### Upsides
* Although mandatory parameters don't have a parameter name now, it's still
quite readable. It's also much less verbose.
* No `None` or `Some` needed.
* Can't fail to initialize the endpoint value, so it's "safer".
* A custom implementation would avoid runtime overhead.

### Downsides
* Currently a bit hacky to implement, which makes it much more complex,
specially because there's no existing macro that can simplify this specific
variation of the builder pattern (that I know of). It requires both a function
and a struct as well, so the implementation can be quite lengthy.
* Still some compilation-time overhead.

## G,H) Grouping up endpoints
Another possible approach based on the previous approach of the builder pattern
consists on grouping up all or some of the endpoints under a single struct.
They will share the optional parameters, which is useful to avoid declaring a
struct with optional parameters for each endpoint we have, and makes a lot of
sense for some APIs.

The `call` method could be removed in place of `approach_f`, and the optional
parameters would go first. This would require a different order for the optional
parameters. Here's an example if all the endpoints shared the same optional
parameters:

```rust
api.opt1(param2)
    .opt2(2222)
    .approach_f("group-builder-pattern")?;
```

And if we used different groups it would look like this:

```rust
api.group()
    .opt1(param2)
    .opt2(2222)
    .approach_g("group-builder-pattern")?;
api.group().opt2(2222).approach_h("builder-from-scratch")?;
```

Here's an implementation with `derive_builder`:

```rust
impl APIClient
    pub fn group(&self) -> GroupBuilder {
        GroupBuilder::default().client(self)
    }
}

#[derive(Default, Builder)]
#[builder(build_fn(private), pattern = "owned")]
pub struct Group<'a> {
    #[builder(setter(strip_option), default)]
    client: Option<&'a APIClient>,
    #[builder(setter(strip_option), default)]
    pub opt1: Option<u32>,
    #[builder(setter(strip_option), default)]
    pub opt2: Option<i32>,
}

impl GroupBuilder<'_> {
    pub fn approach_g(self, name: &str) -> ReturnedValue {
        let data = self.build().unwrap();
        data.client
            .unwrap()
            .actual_endpoint(name, data.opt1, data.opt2)
    }

    pub fn approach_h(self, name: &str) -> ReturnedValue {
        let data = self.build().unwrap();

        // This endpoint doesn't need `opt1`. It can either be ignored, or
        // be an error. I hate silent errors, though.
        if data.opt1.is_some() {
            panic!("opt1 isn't needed for enpoint_h")
        }

        data.client.unwrap().actual_endpoint(name, None, data.opt2)
    }
}
```

As the `approach_h` endpoint indicates, the shared optional parameters don't
actually have to be strictly the same. As long as they are related, they can
share the same group, and some extra verifications can be added in the final
call to make sure the user is using it properly.

### Upsides
* Basically the same as the hybrid builder pattern, but with an easier
implementation, and it might fit perfectly for some APIs that have clearly
established groups of endpoints.

### Downsides
* It's a bit odd, specially because the order is inverse to what you'd expect.
And as it's based on the hybrid builder pattern, it may still be hacky to
implement and require compilation-time overhead.

## I) Macros
Rust macros support variadic arguments, which make it possible to create a
macro with named parameters, like `foo!(1, c = 30, b = -2.0)`. Ideally, we
want a macro that generates the macros for us, which does sound crazy. I wanted
to at least try how existing crates approached this, and only found [`named`
](https://crates.io/crates/named) and [`duang`](https://crates.io/crates/duang),
which haven't been updated in years, and probably for good. I tried `duang`
with Rust 1.47 but got some unexpected errors, so we can assume there are no
crates that support this yet. It definitely sounds like a fun challenge, if
it's still possible to implement.

## Conclusion
Whew! That took more than I expected. Some of these endpoints might be
unnecessarily complicated or straight up weird, but I hope this was as a good
showcase of the different ways optional parameters can be approached in Rust,
and that reading this served as a learning experience. I look forward to seeing
new crates in the future that help make some of the approaches easier to
implement.

The code for the different approaches can be found [here
](https://github.com/marioortizmanero/rust-optional-params). Bear in mind that
there are a lot of different ways to implement the approaches, as I explained
in this post. You can discuss about it at the [reddit thread
](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/j8p6fx/optional_parameters_in_rust).

This was one of my first blog posts, so please let me know what you think about
the writing, the structure and just your overall rating, or if you found any
errors or things that could be improved about the Rust code.

If you're interested in more blog posts, you can follow us on [Twitter
](https://twitter.com/glow_apps) for now.

Commit message:

small note for the approach E from reddit

content/en/blog/rust-parameters.md, after:

---
title: "Optional parameters in Rust"
description: "Analyzing different approaches for optional parameters in Rust"
author: "Mario Ortiz Manero"
developer: true
date: 2020-10-10
---

*Disclaimer: although this post is not directly related to Vidify, I decided to
post it here, since this problem arose in the process of [integrating Rust
](https://github.com/vidify/vidify/issues/107), while improving [Rspotify
](https://github.com/ramsayleung/rspotify/pull/120#issuecomment-683349883).*

Optional or default parameters are a very interesting feature of some languages
that Rust specifically doesn't cover (and looks like it won't [anytime soon
](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2964)). Say your library has lots of
endpoints like so:

```rust
fn endpoint<T1, T2, T3, ...>(mandatory: T1, opt1: Option<T2>, opt2: Option<T3>, ...);
```

In this case, when you call `endpoint`, you have to use `endpoint(mandatory,
None, None, ...)`, or `endpoint(mandatory, Some(val1), Some(val2), ...)`,
instead of the more intuitive `endpoint(mandatory)` or `endpoint(mandatory,
val1, val2)`. Other languages like Python have named arguments, which make
optional parameters natural and easier to read: `endpoint(mandatory, opt1=val1,
opt2=val2)`, while also allowing them to be written in any order.

Even without official support, there are are lots of different ways to approach
them in Rust, which is what this blog post tries to analyze. My goal is not to
show which one is the "best" option, but to exhaustively showcase the different
ways they can be approached, and the ups and downs of each of them.

## Introducing an example
Let's start with a typical web API wrapper library. These often require a client
struct to hold authentication fields and such:

```rust
#[derive(Default, Debug, Clone)]
struct APIClient;
```

This client will have various endpoints which can be used to send requests to
the server. We will use a function with the actual implementation and some type
aliases so that the following snippets are easier to read:

```rust
use std::error::Error;

/// Some value that the endpoint will return
#[derive(Debug, Default)]
struct Value;
type ReturnedValue = Result<Value, Box<dyn Error>>;

/// The actual code for the endpoint inside the client
impl APIClient {
    fn actual_endpoint(name: &str, opt1: Option<u32>, opt2: Option<i32>) -> ReturnedValue {
        println!("params: {} {:?} {:?}", name, opt1, opt2);

        Ok(Default::default())
    }
}
```

## A) Using `Option<T>`
The simplest way to do this would be to just use the `actual_endpoint` function
signature. Sometimes the best solution is the simplest, and your project just
might not need more complex approaches. Do consider if anything more elaborate
is actually necessary.

For the sake of this example, it would look like this:

```rust
impl APIClient {
    pub fn approach_a(&self, name: &str, opt1: Option<u32>, opt2: Option<i32>) -> ReturnedValue {
        self.actual_endpoint(name, opt1, opt2)
    }
}
```

```rust
let api = APIClient {};
let param2: u32 = 324;

api.approach_a("option", Some(param2), Some(1234))?;
api.approach_a("option", None, None)?;
```

### Upsides
* Simplest to understand and implement.

### Downsides
* Multiple optional parameters require lots of `None` and `Some`.
* Parameter names unknown when reading the code, which is specially annoying
with `None` values, since these don't have context to know what they are for.

## B) With `Into<Option<T>>`
A variation of the previous approach consists on using `Into<Option<T>>` as the
generic value for the optional parameters (`impl Into<Option<T>>` can be used as
well). This way, `Some` isn't needed when the optional parameters are specified:

```rust
impl APIClient {
    pub fn approach_b<T1, T2>(&self, name: &str, opt1: T1, opt2: T2) -> ReturnedValue
    where
        T1: Into<Option<u32>>,
        T2: Into<Option<i32>>,
    {
        self.actual_endpoint(name, opt1.into(), opt2.into())
    }
}
```

```rust
api.approach_b("into_option", param2, 1234)?;
// This still works
api.approach_b("into_option", Some(param2), Some(123))?;
api.approach_b("into_option", None, None)?;
```

### Upsides
* `Some` isn't required, which makes it slightly easier to read.

### Downsides
* Multiple optional parameters still require lots of `None`s.
* No parameter names either.
* More complex function signatures, and might not be too "idiomatic".
* Requires generics, 2^N copies of this function may be generated, where N is
the number of optional parameters.

## C) With a custom struct
Another option is to create a struct that holds the parameters and use that
instead. The complexity is still relatively simple, and it can work out well
if the API has functions with repetitive function signatures. This will serve
as a base for the following approaches as well:

```rust
let call1 = params::ApproachC {
    name: "builder".to_string(),
    opt1: Some(param2),
    opt2: Some(123),
};
api.approach_c(&call1)?;
```

We can even use `..Default::default()` to initialize the rest of the parameters
with their default values:

```
let call2 = params::ApproachC {
    name: "builder".to_string(),
    ..Default::default()
};
api.approach_c(&call2)?;
```

The implementation looks like this:

```rust
mod params {
    /// We derive `Default` to be able to initialize with
    /// `..Default::default()`.
    #[derive(Default)]
    pub struct ApproachC {
        pub name: String,
        pub opt1: Option<u32>,
        pub opt2: Option<i32>,
    }
}

impl APIClient {
    pub fn approach_c(&self, data: &params::ApproachC) -> ReturnedValue {
        self.actual_endpoint(&data.name, data.opt1, data.opt2)
    }
}
```

### Upsides
* Some APIs might feel more natural this way, if the combination of these
parameters as a group makes sense.
* The struct can be reused in different calls.

### Downsides
* Multiple optional parameters require lots of `None` and `Some`.
* Way more verbose.
* Can be difficult to scale, since it needs a struct and a function per
endpoint.

## D) With the builder pattern
The previous approach can be improved by using the [builder pattern
](https://doc.rust-lang.org/1.0.0/style/ownership/builders.html) for the
parameters, so that building the parameters is simpler and more pretty to look
at:

```rust
let call1 = params::ApproachDBuilder::default()
    .name("builder")
    .opt1(param2)
    .opt2(2134)
    .build()?;
api.approach_d(&call1)?;

let call2 = params::ApproachDBuilder::default()
    .name("builder")
    .build()?;
api.approach_d(&call2)?;
```

In this case, we use the [`derive_builder`
](https://crates.io/crates/derive_builder) crate to make the implementation less
repetitive:

```rust
mod params {
    #[derive(Default, Builder)]
    pub struct ApproachD {
        #[builder(setter(into))]
        pub name: String,
        #[builder(setter(strip_option), default)]
        pub opt1: Option<u32>,
        #[builder(setter(strip_option), default)]
        pub opt2: Option<i32>,
    }
}

impl APIClient {
    pub fn approach_d(&self, data: &params::ApproachD) -> ReturnedValue {
        self.actual_endpoint(&data.name, data.opt1, data.opt2)
    }
}
```

### Upsides
* It's the most popular pattern in Rust for optional parameters.
* The struct can still be reused in different calls.
* No `None` or `Some` at sight.
* Optional parameters are now associated to their name, which makes it easier
to read.

### Downsides
* Somewhat verbose.
* In our example it can be difficult to scale, since it needs a struct and a
function per endpoint.
* More overhead, both at runtime and compile-time (specially if macros are
used).
* Constructing the values may fail. Thus, the documentation has to specify very
clearly which parameters are mandatory and which aren't.

## E) Endpoint-oriented interface
Here's a different take: what if the API was endpoint-oriented instead of
client-oriented? Starting from the previous approach, we could make the call
*inside the endpoint struct itself* instead of in the API's client by adding it
to `ApproachE`, or by overriding the `build` method from `derive_builder` for
a slightly less verbose version:

```rust
ApproachEBuilder::default()
    .name("endpoint-oriented")
    .opt1(param2)
    .opt2(1111)
    .call(&api)?;
ApproachEBuilder::default()
    .name("endpoint-oriented")
    .call(&api)?;
```

And its implementation:

```rust
#[derive(Default, Builder)]
#[builder(build_fn(private))]
struct ApproachE {
    #[builder(setter(into))]
    pub name: String,
    #[builder(setter(strip_option), default)]
    pub opt1: Option<u32>,
    #[builder(setter(strip_option), default)]
    pub opt2: Option<i32>,
}

impl ApproachEBuilder {
    pub fn call(&self, client: &APIClient) -> ReturnedValue {
        let data = self.build()?; // This might fail!
        // `actual_endpoint` would have to be at least pub(in crate) in this
        // case.
        client.actual_endpoint(&data.name, data.opt1, data.opt2)
    }
}
```

Note: this is assuming the client contains necessary information to make the
requests, like a [`reqwest::Client`
](https://docs.rs/reqwest/latest/reqwest/struct.Client.html) or authentication
details. But for example, `ureq` can perform calls without a client instance,
just by calling [`ureq::get` and similars
](https://docs.rs/ureq/latest/ureq/fn.get.html). In that case, the API could
just not have a client at all, and the `call` method wouldn't require a
reference to the client.

### Upsides
* Fits perfectly for some specific APIs.
* No `None` or `Some` needed.
* Just as readable as the previous case.
* The struct may be reused.
* Simple to use and implement, since it doesn't need declaring both a function
in the client and a parameters struct, only the latter.

### Downsides
* Still relatively verbose, might not be compatible with some APIs.
* Slight builder pattern overhead, and can also fail to construct the value.

## F) Hybrid derive pattern
Back to the client-oriented API. We can remove some of the disadvantages of the
builder pattern by using a different approach and possibly a custom
implementation instead of just using `derive_builder`.

The client will now have a method that calls `ApproachBuilder::default()` and
whatever is necessary to start building the endpoint. Mandatory parameters are
added to that function's signature, so that the build can never fail. This also
avoids passing the client in `call(&api)`, since we can do that inside the
method. This is how it would look like:

```rust
api.approach_f("hybrid-derive-pattern")
    .opt1(param2)
    .opt2(2222)
    .call()?;
```

And an implementation by wrapping `derive_builder`:

```rust
impl APIClient {
    pub fn approach_f(&self, name: &str) -> ApproachFBuilder {
        ApproachFBuilder::default().client(self).name(name)
    }
}

/// Not meant to be used directly, only within `APIClient`.
#[derive(Default, Builder)]
#[builder(build_fn(private), pattern = "owned")]
pub struct ApproachF<'a> {
    #[builder(setter(strip_option), default)]
    client: Option<&'a APIClient>,
    #[builder(setter(into))]
    pub name: String,
    #[builder(setter(strip_option), default)]
    pub opt1: Option<u32>,
    #[builder(setter(strip_option), default)]
    pub opt2: Option<i32>,
}

impl ApproachFBuilder<'_> {
    pub fn call(self) -> ReturnedValue {
        let data = self.build().unwrap(); // This should never fail
        data.client
            .unwrap()
            .actual_endpoint(&data.name, data.opt1, data.opt2)
    }
}
```

`derive_builder` doesn't know that `build()` can never technically fail
because the mandatory parameters are provided inside the wrapper, so it's kind
of a waste to use this macro. It also forces us to create the wrapper because
the builder always has to be initialized with `Builder::default()`. With a
custom implementation, we could have this new method integrated in the builder
itself instead, like `Builder::new(A, B, C)`.

Thus, it might be better to use other crates like [`safe-builder`
](https://github.com/raiden-rs/safe-builder) (WIP and basically abandoned), or
just a custom implementation.

### Upsides
* Although mandatory parameters don't have a parameter name now, it's still
quite readable. It's also much less verbose.
* No `None` or `Some` needed.
* Can't fail to initialize the endpoint value, so it's "safer".
* A custom implementation would avoid runtime overhead.

### Downsides
* Currently a bit hacky to implement, which makes it much more complex,
specially because there's no existing macro that can simplify this specific
variation of the builder pattern (that I know of). It requires both a function
and a struct as well, so the implementation can be quite lengthy.
* Still some compilation-time overhead.

## G,H) Grouping up endpoints
Another possible approach based on the previous approach of the builder pattern
consists on grouping up all or some of the endpoints under a single struct.
They will share the optional parameters, which is useful to avoid declaring a
struct with optional parameters for each endpoint we have, and makes a lot of
sense for some APIs.

The `call` method could be removed in place of `approach_f`, and the optional
parameters would go first. This would require a different order for the optional
parameters. Here's an example if all the endpoints shared the same optional
parameters:

```rust
api.opt1(param2)
    .opt2(2222)
    .approach_f("group-builder-pattern")?;
```

And if we used different groups it would look like this:

```rust
api.group()
    .opt1(param2)
    .opt2(2222)
    .approach_g("group-builder-pattern")?;
api.group().opt2(2222).approach_h("builder-from-scratch")?;
```

Here's an implementation with `derive_builder`:

```rust
impl APIClient
    pub fn group(&self) -> GroupBuilder {
        GroupBuilder::default().client(self)
    }
}

#[derive(Default, Builder)]
#[builder(build_fn(private), pattern = "owned")]
pub struct Group<'a> {
    #[builder(setter(strip_option), default)]
    client: Option<&'a APIClient>,
    #[builder(setter(strip_option), default)]
    pub opt1: Option<u32>,
    #[builder(setter(strip_option), default)]
    pub opt2: Option<i32>,
}

impl GroupBuilder<'_> {
    pub fn approach_g(self, name: &str) -> ReturnedValue {
        let data = self.build().unwrap();
        data.client
            .unwrap()
            .actual_endpoint(name, data.opt1, data.opt2)
    }

    pub fn approach_h(self, name: &str) -> ReturnedValue {
        let data = self.build().unwrap();

        // This endpoint doesn't need `opt1`. It can either be ignored, or
        // be an error. I hate silent errors, though.
        if data.opt1.is_some() {
            panic!("opt1 isn't needed for enpoint_h")
        }

        data.client.unwrap().actual_endpoint(name, None, data.opt2)
    }
}
```

As the `approach_h` endpoint indicates, the shared optional parameters don't
actually have to be strictly the same. As long as they are related, they can
share the same group, and some extra verifications can be added in the final
call to make sure the user is using it properly.

### Upsides
* Basically the same as the hybrid builder pattern, but with an easier
implementation, and it might fit perfectly for some APIs that have clearly
established groups of endpoints.

### Downsides
* It's a bit odd, specially because the order is inverse to what you'd expect.
And as it's based on the hybrid builder pattern, it may still be hacky to
implement and require compilation-time overhead.

## I) Macros
Rust macros support variadic arguments, which make it possible to create a
macro with named parameters, like `foo!(1, c = 30, b = -2.0)`. Ideally, we
want a macro that generates the macros for us, which does sound crazy. I wanted
to at least try how existing crates approached this, and only found [`named`
](https://crates.io/crates/named) and [`duang`](https://crates.io/crates/duang),
which haven't been updated in years, and probably for good. I tried `duang`
with Rust 1.47 but got some unexpected errors, so we can assume there are no
crates that support this yet. It definitely sounds like a fun challenge, if
it's still possible to implement.

## Conclusion
Whew! That took more than I expected. Some of these endpoints might be
unnecessarily complicated or straight up weird, but I hope this was as a good
showcase of the different ways optional parameters can be approached in Rust,
and that reading this served as a learning experience. I look forward to seeing
new crates in the future that help make some of the approaches easier to
implement.

The code for the different approaches can be found [here
](https://github.com/marioortizmanero/rust-optional-params). Bear in mind that
there are a lot of different ways to implement the approaches, as I explained
in this post. You can discuss about it at the [reddit thread
](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/j8p6fx/optional_parameters_in_rust).

This was one of my first blog posts, so please let me know what you think about
the writing, the structure and just your overall rating, or if you found any
errors or things that could be improved about the Rust code.

If you're interested in more blog posts, you can follow us on [Twitter
](https://twitter.com/glow_apps) for now.
